"deplatform" – that is, censor – unacceptable speech. Such speech includes racism, sexism, homophobia and other forms of bigotry, with the crucial caveat that such labels are applied with shocking liberality: statements that would have occasioned no remark in the most progressive circles five or ten years ago frequently meet with shrieking denunciations today. Even inaction, declining to join in the denunciations or to express full-throated support for any number of mercurial shibboleths raises hackles. Silence, a common slogan has it, is violence.\n\nAnd if silence is violence, so of course is speech. And if dissent of either sort – spoken or tacit – is violence, it must be stopped by any means necessary, including real, physical violence. Once this line of thinking is pursued to its logical extreme, the usual brakes on censorship are easily dismissed as irrelevant, absurd – even, through a neat trick whereby the people stripping civil rights from their political enemies become the victims, fascist.\n\n\nPractically all of the speech the deplatformers would silence enjoys First Amendment protection. They bat away that objection. Much of the speech is factually accurate, and the deplatformers know that. No matter. If it doesn't conform to their ideological requirements, it is violence, or if that label doesn't fit, misinformation (also, disinformation).[52]\n\n\nIt has proven not just possible, but trivial, to censor disfavored voices with little to no justification beyond the invocation of that single word – misinformation – despite all the constitutional protections we might reasonably expect to stand in the way.\n\n\nUnsurprisingly, this expedient has proven popular not just with activists, but politicians, bureaucrats and law enforcement.\n\n\nThe Twitter Files, published in 2023 by journalists Matt Taibbi, Bari Weiss and Michael Shellenberger, have revealed that those engaged in the fight against bad speech often acknowledge privately that the posts they are censoring are factual (misinformation that's accurate has been given a special designation by censorship practitioners: malinformation).[53] They justify their inventions based on the risk that the facts could "exacerbate distrust" in people and institutions they wish to defend.[54]\n\n\nPerhaps more important is who these misinformation fighters are. A few years ago, it was reasonable to assume that social media censorship was carried out by employees of the platforms due to pressure from, or sympathy with, activists.\n\n\nThe Twitter Files have exposed that assumption as hopelessly naïve. They have demonstrated active collaboration between employees of every major social media platform;[55] universities including Stanford and NYU; the National Conference on Citizenship, a federally chartered non-profit; and the Centers for Disease Control. Among the sources of funding for the partners involved in one such program – called the Virality Project, its focus was removing disfavored speech related to covid – are the Department of Defense and the National Science Foundation.\n\n\nParticipants in this effort called for (and obtained) the creation of a "Disinformation Governance Board" within the Department of Homeland Security. Calling this body a "Ministry of Truth" or some other Orwellian label doesn't really enhance the impact: its real name is already apex-Orwellian.[56]\nOther revelations in the Twitter Files detail cooperation between Twitter employees and the FBI, as well as the White House. The company repeatedly acceded to requests from these entities to censor legal speech, including speech related to the 2020 presidential election.[57]\n\n\nAnother source of insight into government censorship of social media is Missouri v. Biden, a lawsuit brought by that state's attorney general, together with other plaintiffs, against the Biden administration. The discovery process in that suit has unearthed extensive evidence of First Amendment violations by the federal bureaucracy, much of it overlapping with the content of the Twitter files.[58]\n\n\nA few details add color to the overall picture: the Cybersecurity Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), part of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), acted as a "switchboard" for the censorship efforts of several executive departments, facilitating meetings that included "DHS, FBI, U.S. Department of Justice, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Google, Facebook, Twitter, Reddit, Microsoft, and Verizon Media."\n\nThe head of CISA, justifying the agency's role in coordinating censorship, argued that its mandate to protect infrastructure includes "cognitive infrastructure" – that is, speech – and that "it's really, really dangerous if people get to pick their own facts." (The government, presumably, should be the sole arbiter of what is true.)\nThe plaintiffs note that the Census Bureau and the Treasury Department were also involved in flagging so-called misinformation to remove from social media sites. The Treasury's efforts, according to DHS documents, focused on "public confidence" in the financial system. (I'm willing to bet that the contents of this essay constitute misinformation according to the standards of the Treasury's inquisitors.)\n\nThe Virality Project, mentioned above, "provided strategic insights to government entities such as the OSG [Office of the Surgeon General], CDC, and the Department of Health and Human Services," according to the complaint. The OSG in particular pressured Facebook and other social media companies to remove content related to covid.\n\n\nThe suit also details the government's coordination with platforms to remove election-related posts. Much of this was conducted through the Election Integrity Partnership, a Stanford-affiliated "non-partisan coalition" that makes no mention, at least publicly, of having been set up by CISA.  (According to the complaint, this is "simply another moniker" for the Virality Project; both refer to the same teams engaged in the same activities.)\n\n\nTo be clear: the executive branch, overseen by the president, created an organization to censor content related to presidential elections.\n\n\nElections being the main constitutional means of replacing the president and preventing him or her from staying on for life, I'd argue that people holding that office shouldn't be allowed to dictate what can and can't be said about elections. The fact that the effort was presented as purely academic and unaffiliated with the government is all the more galling.\n\n\nWhat could justify such antidemocratic behavior on the part of the government? They were putting a stop to violence of course. Except this violence, like so much of the "violence" people are accused of these days, was simply to speech – or more precisely, hesitance to curtail others' speech. In July 2021, Biden publicly accused platforms of "killing people" by allowing users to post alleged misinformation related to covid. Shortly thereafter the White House threatened to revisit legislation exempting platforms from legal liability for information users post there. Social media companies responded with a flurry of activity, reviewing or taking down posts and accounts the government had (privately) expressed distaste for.\n\n\nThe plaintiffs in the suit also note that the government has moved beyond policing election- and covid-related posts, branching into "climate change, 'gendered disinformation,' abortion and economic policy" as well as "racial justice, U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan, and the nature of U.S. support to Ukraine."\n\n\nNo single thread runs through all of these topics, except current-year partisan politics, meaning in essence that the White House feels at liberty to order the removal of any content from any social media platform, so long as it disagrees with the political stance of the content.\n\n\nWe're presented with further evidence that misinformation – as a non-expert might describe it – is not the real concern. Facebook's parent company Meta (which also owns Instagram and WhatsApp) reassured the White House that it will target "non-violative content, such as discussing the choice to vaccinate in terms of personal or civil liberties." The factuality – forget the constitutionally protected status – of the content is not considered important; rather the acceptable line has been laid down (vaccines are safe and effective) and any challenge to that line, even if grounded in reality, must be removed.\n\n\nAnd just to emphasize something that's easy to miss in the foregoing: discussions of civil liberties were explicitly singled out for removal, itself a violation of civil liberties.\n\n\nA coordinated censorship campaign embracing social media companies, numerous government agencies, universities, law enforcement bodies, NGOs, the military, the White House, and miscellaneous activists already exists. Its participants are pleased with their success so far in curtailing constitutionally protected expression and plan to expand their efforts to any topic they deem politically salient, not stopping at elections themselves.\n\n\nIt would be appealing and no doubt rather simple for the censors to expand along another axis, from social media platforms into payment systems. As Taibbi noted in a statement delivered to Congress, "ordinary Americans are not just being reported to Twitter for 'deamplification' or de-platforming, but to firms like PayPal [...] and crowdfunding sites like GoFundMe."[59]\n\n\nThe financial services sector is joining the misinformation crusade.\nJPMorgan Chase\nIgnoring Canada, banks don't yet condition their services on customers' holding acceptable views, at least to my knowledge.[60] There appears to have been a high-profile exception to the rule, however, and it could be a sign of things to come.\n\n\nJPMorgan Chase closed Kanye "Ye" West's accounts after the artist made a string of explicitly antisemitic comments in the fall of 2022.[61] West's rhetoric – including a threat to go "death con 3 On JEWISH PEOPLE" – escalated in the weeks following his bank's decision to cut ties, and before long he was publicly indulging in unambiguous praise for Hitler.\n\n\nIf there were ever speech that merited ejection from the financial system, I suppose this would be it. It is cartoonishly villainous to glorify one of history's greatest mass murderers and menace one of the communities he singled out for physical extermination. But accepting such a premise – that access to banking is subject to an ideological test of any sort – is fundamentally illiberal, and down the line it poses a greater threat to freedom and justice than some obviously unwell celebrity's embrace of Nazism.\n\n\nNow JPMorgan Chase, to my knowledge, is at perfect liberty, legally speaking, to end its relationship with Ye for this or any number of reasons. (Nor, to my knowledge, is there any proof that Ye's comments were the reason for the bank's decision.)\n\n\nBut as with PayPal, such decisions set a precedent that withholding the ability to transact is an effective and convenient means of social control. It's difficult to argue that the people running a private business – bank executives, say – should be compelled to provide services to someone they don't want as a customer. They should enjoy their own freedoms, after all.\n\n\nBut in the realm of finance and payments, the line between the state and private business breaks down before it's even drawn. Personnel move freely between Wall Street C-suites and the Treasury, along with any number of ministries of finance and financial regulatory bodies around the world. Just 15 years ago, American taxpayers bailed out the world's largest banks. A century before that, the country's richest bankers bailed out the American government.\n\n\nIt's far from surprising that when Canada ordered banks to summarily freeze the accounts of anti-lockdown protesters, the banks complied without a (public) word of complaint.\n\n\nNor is it surprising that PayPal acts as freelance private-sector law enforcement, doing its best to crack down on activities without asking the government to trouble itself with obtaining warrants or even making specific requests. Often enough, the activities aren't illegal, so law enforcement would have little hope of following the constitutionally prescribed procedure.\n\n\nReturning to Ye, though: should we shed a tear for the man in a ski mask extolling Hitler's contributions to civilization?[62] I don't plan to, but nor should we let contempt for this specific individual cloud our vision of the principles at stake. If only people who sank to such a level were targeted for financial exclusion, I doubt much practical damage would result. The world might even marginally improve.\n\n\nBut authoritarian overreach often targets the least sympathetic figures first, then, once it's gained momentum, moves towards the center. The 18th-century French revolutionaries began by defining an aristocrat as French society always had: a titular member of the nobility, recognized as such by clergy, commoners and other aristocrats alike. Many of the revolutionaries being aristocrats themselves, they weren't generally bent on killing the whole caste.\n\n\nWithin a few years, however, an "aristocrat" could be anyone, commoner, noble or priest, unfortunate enough to fall foul of the mob. The virtuous revolutionary "citizen" denouncing this aristocrat could be a member of the nobility who had renounced their title.[63] "Aristocrat" was simply shorthand for a counterrevolutionary, a heretic. To be labeled one was to be one – no daylight shone between accusation and conviction – and to be one was to deserve death.\n\n\nWe might consider the case of Ye's interviewer in the ski mask incident, who practically pleaded with the artist to express at least some reservation regarding the Third Reich. Alex Jones is not generally known as a voice of reason. He is notorious for a years-long campaign meant to discredit and torment – of all people – the parents of victims of an elementary school shooting. \n\n\nUnsurprisingly then, when Jones was removed from all major internet platforms in 2018,[64] words of protest were few and far between. Who could regard the slippery slope of censorship with such dread that they'd defend the Sandy Hook truther?\n\n\nBut there were those who warned that the same fate would befall more and more people, for less and less heinous speech, and they were correct.[65] Today people are routinely removed from social platforms for posting "misinformation." As noted above, in many if not most cases, this speech is a matter of opinion, and in a sizable minority of cases, the "misinformation" is factually correct, but considered somehow unseemly.\n\n\nDebates over the effectiveness of covid vaccines brought many such cases to light. As Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg said in 2023:\n\n\n"take some of the stuff around covid earlier on in the pandemic, where there were real health implications, but there hadn't been time to fully vet a bunch of the scientific assumptions, and unfortunately I think a lot of the kind of establishment on that kind of waffled on a bunch of facts and asked for a bunch of things to be censored that in retrospect ended up being more debatable or true."[66]\n\n\nIt's not necessary, however, to make analogies to social media platforms to argue that financial deplatforming will hit a slippery slope. PayPal started sloping long ago, moving from policing sex work to policing speech.\nGuns, porn and abortion\nThe reasons behind PayPal or JPMorgan's actions can be guessed at, but the conversations that precipitated them are opaque and will probably stay that way. In some cases, though, financial deplatforming – or steps in that direction – are clearly the result of long and targeted activist campaigns.\n\n\nIn September 2022, Visa, Amex and Mastercard agreed to categorize gun sales differently from other "general merchandise" purchases, the category under which such sales previously fell.\n\n\nThis added surveillance allows credit card companies to "flag suspicious purchases or more easily trace how guns and ammunition are sold," according to the Associated Press, which described the development as a "significant win" for gun control advocates.[67]\n\n\nTo state the obvious, these activists aren't elected, so they can't be removed from office by voters. They aren't businesses, so they can't be pushed to change course by customers (though customers can and should punish the businesses that cave to such activists' demands).\nThese groups aren't directly accountable to ordinary people who need to make and receive payments, yet they're able to constrain these people's freedom to transact. They do so in order to make it more difficult to engage in legal activities that, in the activists' opinion, shouldn't be legal. Rather than accept the outcome of the democratic process and continue campaigning for stricter gun control, such groups enforce their preferred version of the law by lobbying for changes to the internal processes of financial platforms: legislation by other means.\n\n\nGiven the success of this technique, it's a matter of time before pressure groups subject a wider range of legal purchases to added scrutiny, without the hassle of winning elections and passing laws.\n\n\nThe editor of a Catholic news outlet spoke to Visa CEO Alfred Kelly in 2023, pressing him to consider whether the company was "funding" the sexual exploitation of minors by processing users' payments to PornHub.[68]\n\n\nPro-choice activists have expressed justifiable concerns that opponents of abortion, another politically charged issue, are likely to seek out payments data in order to punish women who obtain the procedure. In 2022, after decades of campaigning on the issue and pushing for the nomination of Supreme Court justices who would overturn a 1973 decision legalizing abortion nationwide, pro-life activists managed to ban it outright in several U.S. states.[69]\n\n\nWomen in these places are able to travel to other states to have the procedure (though in practice this isn't always feasible), and some advocates of the ban wish to prosecute those who do so. Payments data is a convenient way to gather evidence for such prosecutions.\n\n\nContacted by the New York Times, few payments providers would say what they would do in response to subpoenas from, say, Texas authorities seeking information on a woman's financial activity. Experts interviewed by the paper pointed out that courts could potentially order companies to turn the data over, as well as issuing gag orders to prevent them from alerting the woman alleged to have sought the abortion. She in turn could face jail time.[70]\n\n\nExplaining the precedents for such subpoenas, the Times wrote, "Card issuers have grown used to requests for user data in terrorism, money-laundering and illegal-trafficking investigations." The slope slippens.\nThe war on cash\nOf course, the authorities' and activists' ability to exploit payment rails as a chokepoint goes out the window if people simply pay cash. Unsurprisingly, then, the state is making efforts to curtail its use. It's common to hear politicians and policy wonks disparage the evils of "dirty" paper money: dirty both in the literal sense, of germ-carrying bills, and more importantly in the figurative sense, of filthy lucre obtained illicitly.\n\n\nIndian Prime Minister Narendra Modi's demonetization of large rupee notes in 2016 had the stated aim of flushing "black money" out of the economy and moving towards a "cashless society."[71] The move caused immense disruption, forcing millions to line up outside of banks and ATMs (over a hundred people reportedly died in these lines). What it did not do was eliminate cash or leave the beneficiaries of crime and corruption stranded: essentially all demonetized notes were exchanged, so 99.3% of the dirty money blighting the Indian economy before demonetization continued to circulate afterwards.[72]\n\n\nIt's common to envision a near future in which cash has been eliminated entirely, but that's not to say it's an edgy or futuristic vision: people simply assume at some level that cash's time is limited. What use, outside of crime, could grubby paper notes have in an otherwise digital world?\n\n\nWhile it's possible that these assumptions are the natural product of the internet and smartphones, we can't be sure, because we can't ignore the effect of decades of legislation aimed at limiting the use of cash to small, everyday transactions.\n\n\nIn a piece published by Coin Center, University of Virginia Law School adjunct professor Abraham Sutherland details the history, effects and intention of the law's most powerful disincentive against the use of cash: section 6050I of the U.S. tax code, passed in 1984.[73]\n\n\nToday, Sutherland writes, due to this provision and its subsequent expansions and revisions, "if you use large amounts of physical currency, there's something wrong with you, and it's probably that you're a criminal. It's such a legally fraught hassle that there's no other explanation."\n\n\nIn 1970, in an effort to combat or be seen to combat drug trafficking and money laundering, banks were required to report cash transactions over $10,000, the equivalent of $65,000 today. In 1984, anyone performing commercial transactions was required to report similarly sized transactions by the passage of section 6050I. This allowed law enforcement to go after drug dealers for failure to report cash income, particularly after 1988, when violations were upgraded to felonies. (According to Sutherland, this is the only information reporting requirement carrying felony penalties.)\n\n\nThis change to tax law massively enhanced the state's capacity for financial surveillance. Whatever its intended purpose, this has become the law's most consequential effect, and the state has strengthened the statute in order to enhance this capacity further.\n\n\nThe reporting requirement has become a window, easily available to law enforcement of any description, into the financial lives of Americans. Any cash transaction of more-than-quotidian importance now must be shared with the tax authorities, who of course are normally barred from violating taxpayers' confidentiality. But the exception to this rule, passed by Congress in 1988, is Form 8300, the form the IRS requires anyone receiving $10,000 or more to file.\n\n\nThe Treasury can share your Form 8300 with employees of any federal agency or, as of 1996, any agency of any state or local – even foreign – government. Nor do these lax controls actually limit how widely cash transaction data can be shared: in 2001, Congress copy-pasted the text of 6050I into the Bank Secrecy Act, requiring the same information be shared with FinCEN, who can then treat it with even less regard for privacy than the IRS does.\n\n\nCash transaction reporting requirements militate against the logic of normal commerce. To accept, say, $20,000 in cash in exchange for some good or service requires a seller to verify their counterparty's government ID, obtain their Social Security number and date of birth, record their occupation, and describe the transaction. The seller then signs the form under penalty of perjury and mails it to the IRS in at most 15 days. Failure to meet this high bar of peer-to-peer surveillance on behalf of the government can result in a $25,000 fine or five years in prison.\n\n\nSutherland depicts what navigating it routinely might be like for a law-abiding business owner who wants to deal in cash. I suggest reading it; it's maddening. His point, though, is that such business owners are hypothetical. They do not and cannot exist, because at some point, they must give up on either cash or compliance. So cash is in practice an illegal medium of payment for businesses, unless they limit themselves to accepting it from customers in small amounts – the way a restaurant might – and immediately depositing it to a bank account.\n\n\nThis burdensome process encourages anyone not dealing in organs harvested from the living to simply use banks. But the process reveals something about the role of banks, at least from the government's perspective: the high-fidelity surveillance that merchants are required to perform on their counterparties is simply the level of surveillance the state can expect its compliant financial sect