 freedom to transact is disappearing\n\n\nAs of today, a bank or other financial service provider will be able to immediately freeze or suspend an account without a court order. In doing so, they will be protected against civil liability for actions taken in good faith.\n\n\nChrystia Freeland\n\n\n\n\nYou might see the previous chapter as overly anxious extrapolation from current trends, if not paranoid fantasy. I'm arguing that we've begun a slide into a state of profound unfreedom, in which the ability to obtain any good or service depends on the whims of the state, which – even if it's benevolent and wise for the moment (it's not) – could easily become uncaring, misguided or actively malicious.\n\n\nBut even if you accept that we could slide into such a hell, you probably wish I'd offer some sort of evidence that the slide has begun. A lot of things could happen.\n\nUnfortunately, there is ample evidence that business and government leaders intend to introduce fully programmable, remote-control currencies, and to use this technology to pursue policy goals that large constituencies – if not majorities – of the people affected would oppose if given a say. To put it more bluntly: CBDCs are an end run around democratic processes – and potentially, a highly effective one.\n\n\nAll the more so because, again unfortunately, the majority of the electorate in the average liberal democracy has little to no idea that such projects are being planned. CBDCs are no secret: I haven't smuggled sensitive documents out of some Washington sub-sub-basement. Central bankers have churned out discussion papers, white papers, proposals and plans related to CBDCs since around 2014,[37] but the audience for this literature is the sort of person who knows what "FOMC" stands for, what the FOMC does, and most of its members by name. To the vast majority, "CBDC" is just one more in a sea of wonkish acronyms.\n\n\nNot infrequently, the financial media will report on these central bank publications, but the coverage is for the most part perfunctory and little more than a rewording of central bank statements – sometimes with a nod to abstract Concerns added for balance.\n\n\nReuters' article on "digital dollar" pilots announced in 2021 is a model of this sort of coverage: it presents CBDCs as a straightforward modernization project meant to "improve payment systems" and "boost financial inclusion"; the notes of caution – the need to protect "privacy and freedom of commerce" – are provided by the NGO running the pilot and the central bank itself, not critics or even plausibly neutral observers.[38]\n\n\nI can only blame the media so much: interest in the topic simply isn't there. It's irrelevant to the culture wars that keep contemporary media in business (which is ironic, given how potent a weapon in those same culture wars CBDCs are likely to become).[39]\n\n\nAnd the source material, unsurprisingly, is sanitary fare. It takes a measure of skepticism and imagination to see how the dollar, but digital could empower states in ways they simply shouldn't be empowered. Perhaps, reporters, editors and readers alike could be forgiven for thinking, it takes a bit too much skepticism and imagination.\n\n\nBut read the literature closely, and central bankers protest too much, making promises to maintain privacy and neutrality that inspire less confidence every time they're repeated. And sometimes, they make no such promises, laying out plainly how closely they intend to watch individual consumers' most quotidian transactions, and how they intend to censor the ones they deem undesirable.\n\n\nNor would it be much comfort if central bankers sincerely desired to protect the freedom to transact. (They don't.) If the systems they implement don't enforce such protections at the protocol level – if human decision-making is the only safeguard – then sooner or later the decision-makers will abuse the powers these systems afford them. As Charlie Munger put it, show me the incentive, and I'll show you the outcome.\n\n\nFor the time being, though, CBDCs remain in the discussion and planning phases. But even in the absence of CBDCs, we're faced with a growing list of concrete examples in which public- and private-sector actors abandon the principle – never so much a principle as the plain fact of a cash-first world – that money is a neutral medium. Private firms have increasingly adopted the view that, even though it violates no law or regulation, a given transaction should be subject to their approval, based on criteria they're free to devise in secret and revise on the fly. Politicians, bureaucrats and activists have encouraged these abuses, pushing firms to limit or revoke their customers' freedom to transact on transparently ideological grounds.\n\n\nCBDCs themselves, in other words, are not the whole issue. They are likely to be developed and adopted, but even if they aren't, powerful actors already possess the willingness and capability to limit the freedom to transact. The following examples deserve our attention because they demonstrate that fact, but also because they demonstrate the motivations, tactics and justifications of the people behind them – people who, if they themselves don't eventually control a CBDC, might inspire those who do.\nCanada\nIn February 2022, in response to protests against covid lockdowns and vaccine mandates that saw truckers blockade economically important southern border crossings, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau invoked a law granting the government sweeping emergency powers.[40] Under this expanded remit, the government froze the financial assets of protesters and required credit card companies and fundraising platforms to report activity related to the protests to anti-money laundering authorities.\n\n\nStanding alongside Trudeau, Chrystia Freeland, Canada's Minister of Finance, announced these measures at a press conference (emphasis mine):\n\n\n"In invoking the Emergencies Act, we are announcing the following immediate actions. First, we are broadening the scope of Canada's anti-money laundering and terrorist financing rules so that they cover crowdfunding platforms and the payment service providers they use. These changes cover all forms of transactions, including digital assets such as cryptocurrencies.\n\n\n"The illegal blockades have highlighted the fact that crowdfunding platforms and some of the payment service providers they use are not fully captured under the Proceeds of Crime and Terrorist Financing Act. Our banks and financial institutions are already obligated to report to the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada, or FINTRAC.\n\n\n"As of today, all crowdfunding platforms and the payment service providers they use must register with FINTRAC, and they must report large and suspicious transactions to FINTRAC. This will help mitigate the risk that these platforms receive illicit funds, increase the quantity and quality of intelligence received by FINTRAC, and make more information available to support investigations by law enforcement into these illegal blockades.\n"We are making these changes because we know that these platforms are being used to support illegal blockades and illegal activity which is damaging the Canadian economy. The government will also bring forward legislation to provide these authorities to FINTRAC on a permanent basis.\n\n\n"Second, the government is issuing an order with immediate effect under the Emergencies Act authorizing Canadian financial institutions to temporarily cease providing financial services where the institution suspects that an account is being used to further the illegal blockades and occupations. This order covers both personal and corporate accounts.\n\n\n"Third, we are directing Canadian financial institutions to review their relationships with anyone involved in the illegal blockades and report to the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] or CSIS [Canadian Security Intelligence Service]. As of today, a bank or other financial service provider will be able to immediately freeze or suspend an account without a court order. In doing so, they will be protected against civil liability for actions taken in good faith.\n\n"Federal government institutions will have a new broad authority to share relevant information with banks and other financial service providers to ensure that we can all work together to put a stop to the funding of these illegal blockades.\n\n\n"This is about following the money. This is about stopping the financing of these illegal blockades. We are today serving notice: if your truck is being used in these illegal blockades your corporate accounts will be frozen. The insurance on your vehicle will be suspended. Send your semi-trailers home. The Canadian economy needs them to be doing legitimate work, not to be illegally making us all poorer."[41]\n\n\nI hope you'll pardon the long quotation. I see Freeland's address as some of the most valuable primary source material related to the topic of this essay, both because it will be remembered as a turning point in the history of liberal democracies (hopefully in the direction of stronger protections for the right to transact), and because it perfectly captures the rhetoric and mentality of those who support increased surveillance of and control over payments.\n\n\nFreeland presented the government's gathering more data on its citizens' transactions as a good in itself ("increase the quantity and quality of intelligence received by FINTRAC"). She presented the new controls as an extension of anti-money laundering and anti-terrorist financing rules. Since it's difficult to see how the protesters were laundering money (my understanding is that money launderers try to avoid drawing attention to themselves), that leaves two possibilities: the protesters were terrorists (she may in fact have meant to imply this) or, to my mind, the more likely conclusion – that these laws, with their distractingly villainous names, have little to do with terrorists or money laundering, and everything to do with dragnet surveillance.\n\n\nShe made no attempt to present these measures as consistent with liberal democratic values, such as the presumption of innocence, the right to free assembly, or limitations on the government's ability to conduct searches and seizures.\n\n\nInstead, she made eight references to "illegal blockades." They almost certainly were illegal: civil disobedience is illegal by definition. But beyond that, there are limits to what any state or society can tolerate from its protesters, and the truckers may indeed have exceeded those limits. It's not my place to say. What I want to stress is that no court heard evidence regarding these protests or ruled them illegal. The laws they were accused of violating weren't specified. In the space of five minutes, a government minister declared the protesters' actions illegal; unveiled a new, unprecedented punishment for their crimes; and deputized private sector firms to root out and punish the perpetrators.\n\n\nNor was it an idle threat. A week into the state of emergency, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police announced that they had frozen 219 financial products, as well as 3.8 million Canadian dollars held by a payment processor. (By that time, according to the government, the process of unfreezing assets had begun.)[42]\n\n\nCanada's actions have no antecedent that I'm aware of in modern liberal democracies, but even so they elicited muted criticism. Mainstream outlets, at least in the U.S., paid little attention to this innovation in the maintenance of public order: using information obtained through warrantless surveillance of the financial system to cut off protesters' access to credit cards and bank accounts.\n\n\nThe lack of any official condemnation from other Western governments suggests they might at least consider pursuing similar measures to break up protests against their own policies. To state the obvious, there is no guarantee that such weaponization of the financial system will be limited to left-of-center governments like Trudeau's, or its victims to those aligned with the political right. Once these tools become available to them, governments of any persuasion will gladly use them against protesters of any description.\n\n\nCanadians will almost certainly hesitate to attend protests critical of the government from now on, since they know that they can be arrested and denied the means to pay bail – indeed, pay for anything. Their right to free assembly has been effectively eliminated, without any need to pass a law or create a spectacle through physical confrontations. \n\n\nThe people of other ostensibly liberal democracies might soon experience the same chilling effect, to the extent they haven't already, having seen Canada's example.\nPayPal\nOften, financial services providers are happy to surveil and punish their customers for the sorts of infractions the Canadian authorities went after, but without any prompting from the government. (At least, any public prompting.)\n\n\nPayPal, a private payment processor, has for years enforced an idiosyncratic moral code based not on the laws of any jurisdiction it happens to operate in, but its own opaque Terms of Service regime.\nIn 2020, Neeraj K. Agrawal, Communications Director at the non-profit crypto advocacy group Coin Center, compiled a list of examples in which PayPal barred users from its platform for engaging in perfectly legal activity: OnlyFans models were prohibited from selling nude photos on the platform; independent journalists tracking the spread of covid in prisons were kicked off when Twitter flagged them for spreading misinformation; a website publishing files for 3D printing guns (protected speech) and selling related merch was banned (their Twitter account is also suspended).[43]\n\n\nThe ACLU has criticized PayPal for barring sex workers.[44] The company was accused of stalling efforts to raise bail money for Black Lives Matter protesters.[45] It shut a user out for making payments related to Tor nodes he was hosting.[46] A Canadian news outlet's payment for an article about Syrian refugees was blocked – apparently for mentioning the word "Syria."[47] PayPal froze WikiLeaks' account in 2010.[48]\n\n\nRecently, the company went beyond keeping users' funds in limbo, and signaled its intention to actually seize money from users who fall afoul of its rules.\nIn October 2022 PayPal said it would levy steep fines for a range of activities, including speech the company deemed unacceptable.[49] The language of the updated "Acceptable Use Policy," which would have gone into force the following month, labeled the "sending, posting, or publication of messages, content, or materials that meet certain criteria" as "prohibited activities" that could result in fines of $2,500. Among these "certain criteria" was content found to "promote misinformation."\n\n\nA company whose purpose – at least in its customers' eyes – is to process payments, has taken upon itself the duty to monitor its customers' speech, judge that speech's merits according to criteria known to no one outside the company (in all likelihood, never explicitly defined anywhere), and if the speech is found wanting, seize its customers' funds as punishment.\n\n\nTo be clear, the procedure envisioned in this document wasn't to freeze funds or bar access to the platform. PayPal would have gone beyond even Canada's emergency measures and permanently confiscated its customers' money. (The document was pulled from PayPal's website, and the company claimed the proposed change was an "error.")\n\n\nIf a state took these actions, we would be rightly outraged, but hardly surprised. Monarchs, emperors, high priests, generals and the like have all too frequently done this sort of thing. In enforcing their vision of truth, they've used economic measures along with other, grislier tactics. One could name any number of examples from any number of places, going back as far as recorded history permits.\n\n\nFor a private company to adopt this attitude, though, is strange. Having your assets confiscated for heresy is one thing, if the Church or King is doing it. If a democracy is doing it, you might (but shouldn't) comfort yourself with the notion that at least the censorship is of, by and for the people. For an online payments service to act this way, though, is something else entirely. PayPal is not a democratically accountable institution. Nor does any sort of social contract exist that could conceivably give it the right to punish crimes of conscience.\n\n\nThe situation is just silly. PayPal isn't yet 30 years old. It has "pal" in the name. For an institution of this type this to freelance as Ministry of Truth would be a farce, except that it's part of a definite trend: Facebook, Google and Twitter have taken it upon themselves to determine – according to inconsistent, flighty standards that make scant reference to constitutional principles – what may and may not be said.\nThird parties\nWhy should these companies be empowered to enforce a superset of the law? It seems law enforcement bodies themselves have provided some of the impetus.\n\n\nCops in constitutional democracies are in theory constrained by protections like the Fourth Amendment prohibition against unlawful search and seizure. But American authorities, at least, have a convenient way around these hurdles: once a person voluntarily provides a third party with information (the way PayPal's customers provide it with their payments data), constitutional strictures fall away. Law enforcement can simply ask the company for the data, with no need to seek a search warrant from a court.\n\n\nThe company could refuse, of course, in which case the authorities are back to petitioning judges through the normal procedure envisioned in the Bill of Rights. But from the perspective of a heavily regulated financial services company, how is it in your interest to stand up for your customers' rights? The politicians and regulators who can make or break your thin margins with a couple well-aimed laws or rules don't, with rare exceptions, care about your customers' privacy. They actively resent it, to the extent it makes catching criminals, terrorists and "extremists" – a term that tends to cover the whole of the political opposition – more difficult.\n\n\nOne might expect voters to enforce a concern for constitutional protections by electing lawmakers who care about such protections: after all, these voters are almost all customers of one or more financial services firms. But by and large, the electorate doesn't care either. They too would like to catch criminals, terrorists and extremists, and this is a perfectly healthy instinct.\n\n\nIf you're doing nothing wrong, you have nothing to hide, authoritarian politicians argue, and in the main, voters agree. This logic presupposes, however, a reasonable and humane definition of "wrong." Practically everyone in a modern democratic society qualifies as a criminal and extremist by the standards of the sort of authoritarian regime that governed broad swathes of the globe in the 20th century.\n\n\nConsidering voters' (and customers') indifference to cooperation between law enforcement and data-rich financial service providers, the clear interest law enforcement has in cultivating such cooperation, and the regulatory hostility companies can expect if they resist, it's hardly surprising that PayPal should volunteer to enforce not just the law, but the preferences of government officials.\n\n\nPayPal's Acceptable Use Policy reads as if the company has been deputized by the authorities to enforce the laws they wish existed, as well as the ones that actually do. Item one under the heading "Prohibited Activities" covers those that "violate any law, statute, ordinance or regulation." Fair enough. There then follow a couple dozen other prohibited activities and yet more which require pre-approval.[50]\n\n\nThe obvious question is not addressed: why should PayPal restrict payments for legal goods and services – even "items that are considered obscene?"\n\n\nOf course as a private company they're within their rights to do so. Customers can take their business elsewhere, the logic runs. But when most if not all financial services providers are similarly cowed into acting as freelance police, what is the alternative?\n\nIt's also worth interrogating the justification for companies behaving this way: they're private, true, but they're also some of the most heavily regulated firms in the private sector. Legislators and bureaucrats have long felt comfortable placing significant constraints on these companies' behavior. They could, I imagine, mandate that firms only censor transactions when actual laws are being violated, but they don't. \n\n\nThe result is a system that enables enforcement without legislation. A legal but obscene activity rubs law enforcement the wrong way. It is made known that payments related to such activities are risky for firms to process, so they don't. Replicated across the economy, this cycle creates de facto law without the need for democratic debate, legislative process or judicial scrutiny. These pseudo-laws can't be challenged or repealed – or even, usually, read. They are codified, if at all, through vague, sweeping references in terms of service agreements that can change at any time without notice.\n\n\nThe victims of this system are the small but growing class of "debanked" people, who almost never find out why their bank – sometimes multiple banks – have severed ties with them. One day their cards stop working, they slog through their bank's customer service morass, and in the end they still have no idea why they've been deemed unworthy of an account.\n\n\nIn 2023, Naafeh Dhillon told the New York Times that his card was rejected one evening, and all Chase would tell him was that "unexpected activity" had led to all of his accounts being closed.[51] "I received no kind of warning or red flag," Dhillon said. (Money sent by his Pakistani parents while he was in college was put forward as a potential culprit.)\n\n\nAnother Chase customer said he'd been unable to find out why he was dropped as a customer even after three years. \n\n\nA Synchrony customer told the paper that his funds had been frozen because – he was able to wring the reason from the bank – of an out-of-state attempt to log into his account. He made the attempt; he was traveling.\n\n\nRecall Alice, the hypothetical CBDC user I invented to illustrate the horror of being locked out of using one's national currency. Her money became unavailable one day, and she had no means of finding out why or reversing the decision. This sort of thing happens today, and appears to be happening more often.\n\n\nLawyers write expansive, moralizing terms of service that allow for the removal of any even remotely risky customer. Programmers and – to the extent AI is involved in the process, programs – translate these rules into automated systems that comb customer data for unexpected activity. Law enforcement, as I mentioned above, is only remotely interested in perhaps 4% of these alerts, but there's no question of letting the justice system sort out who's guilty of wrongdoing. Anyone the banks remotely suspect of anything, they simply kick out. Why take the risk?\n\nThere's no reason to expect CBDCs to operate differently. Who will build the compliance and risk management systems, after all, if not the people who built them for the banks? The only difference will be that when the central bank debanks people, they'll have no legal way to buy or sell anything.\nThe misinformation hunt\nA trend that, for the time being, is mostly unrelated to the financial sector provides a compelling reason to worry about the freedom to transact.\n\n\nThe past decade has seen the emergence of concerted activist efforts aimed at technology companies, originating from within their ranks as well as outside – from NGOs, universities, and the government. The details of the agenda – which is far from unified – change frequently, and often on a dime, but "progressive" is the label activists generally use, and anyone passingly familiar with the political discourse knows more or less what that term indicates in a given moment.\n\n\nProgressive campaigns have focused most heavily on social media companies, where the goal is to 