agion. According to the Annals of Lorsch, the emperor requested a copy of a history of the papacy from Pope Adrian I in 774. The book, which to be clear, had already been written, took a year to be hand-copied and transported over the Alps.\n\n\nThat was the velocity at which the two most powerful men in western Europe, the heirs of Peter the apostle and Caesar Augustus, could transmit information. Both would have been flummoxed by our anxiety over the instantaneous, global spread of heresy – sorry, misinformation – via light pulsing through massive cables at the bottom of the sea.\n\n\nTwelve centuries later, people's grasp of current and emerging technological capabilities is so unevenly distributed that we walk the earth simultaneously with Charlemagnes, Morses, Daguerres, Bells, Diffies and Berners-Lees.[8] Some of us, including the most powerful among us, don't consider how control of digital payment rails could pose a threat to anyone; others are launching us into a future so new and strange that vanishingly few people understand the risks and opportunities. Likely they themselves don't understand.\n\n\nWe won't have centuries to figure out the implications of credit cards – to say nothing of fully programmable money under centralized bureaucratic control in the form of central bank digital currencies (CBDCs).\n\n\nCBDCs are one of the main concerns of this essay, and I'll go into borderline-excessive detail about them later on, but briefly: they are digital currency issued directly by central banks. Take Europe as an example. The European Central Bank issues the euro, and for the most part, euros are already digital; physical coins and bills make up a fraction of the total value of the currency. But the 'digital euro,' or whatever it ends up being called, will mark a sharp departure from how the euro works today.\n\n\nAs a CBDC, it will incorporate a complete record of every transaction in which it's used. This record will be available to bureaucrats and, by extension, politicians and law enforcement. Today, your bank knows when you spend euros deposited with them, or receive them to your account. But the central bank and the rest of the EU government don't know. They likely have some idea – perhaps more than you think – but their picture is necessarily incomplete.\n\n\nWith a CBDC, the state will receive a complete, real-time stream of all transaction data. Following the elimination of cash – a goal closely associated with the introduction of CBDCs – there will be no legal way to transact outside of this government panopticon.\n\n\nThe state will also be able to control CBDC transactions: freeze your account, confiscate your funds, prevent you from sending money to or receiving it from certain parties – whoever the state deems unfit. The rules governing how money works could in principle be arbitrarily complex and liable to change at any time.\n\n\nBanks can act this way today, and sometimes they do – often enough, when they do, it's at the behest of the state. But with a CBDC, the government will be able to intervene directly – no need to go through private-sector intermediaries who might make a fuss. Arbitrary limitations on the freedom to transact and summary seizures of funds might of course be illegal, but the question could quickly become academic. When violating the law at scale becomes so easy, the government might be hard to convince to do otherwise, especially when it can instantly revoke its critics' ability to buy food.\n\n\nFor the moment, CBDCs are more idea than reality. But world leaders are openly discussing their development and introduction. China is already testing a prototype at scale. The Bahamas has deployed one nationwide, the only country to do so – although almost no one uses it. In Europe and the U.S., bureaucratic and legislative wheels are turning. Journalists are being primed.\n\n\nThe same Turing completeness that lets you build a website that can look like anything and do anything with any data you give it, will determine the degree to which currency can be configured, manipulated and controlled. Drain the account of a single dissident; confiscate $200 from every resident of Los Angeles; give $50 to anyone who voted a certain way – hell, anyone born in July. The possibilities are endless.\n\n\nOf course nothing is (entirely) new under the sun. Authorities have been seizing and doling out assets for millennia: the story of the Knights Templar comes to mind as a dramatic and well-known pre-modern example of punitive confiscation. But if Philip IV of France could seize the bodies and assets of 100-something individuals, he could never have dreamed of issuing an order that would render all the coinage in an entire district worthless instantly.\n\n\nThat's the sort of fearsome miracle central banks might be able to carry out in a few years: update a database row, tweak a configuration, perhaps for the really tough cases, write a few lines of code, et voilà.\n\n\nAs Matt Odell, a bitcoin investor and entrepreneur, has written, the preferred interface for this kind of thing is likely to be an AI chat bot, which 'seems ideal for weaponizing massive surveillance databases way more efficiently than current search tools.' (He provides an example input: 'close the bank accounts of anyone who went to the anti government protest in Paris last week.')[9]\n\n\nBy combining streams of near-perfect surveillance, the state will be able to view an individual's physical movements, reading material, expressions of opinion, social interactions and monetary transactions as a unified whole. They will have the ability to instantaneously throttle or halt the economic activity of individual dissidents and entire social groups.\n\n\nIn the U.S., this outcome still lies somewhere over the horizon – how far is anyone's guess – and may even be avoided to some appreciable degree. In China, this reality has already begun to take shape.\n\n\nBeginning in April 2022, banks in the central Chinese province of Henan suspended cash withdrawals, leaving hundreds of thousands of customers without access to their savings. The following month, hundreds of protesters traveled to Zhengzhou, the provincial capital, to demand the return of their money. When they planned to repeat the protest that June, however, many found themselves unable to leave their homes. The government had falsely diagnosed them with covid, flipping the health codes on the would-be protesters' phones to red. Under the draconian lockdown regime in place in China at that time, this was the equivalent of placing them under house arrest.[10]\n\n\nThe mechanism for social control in this case wasn't a CBDC – though China has been actively testing one in a growing number of provinces since 2020 – but it's easy enough to see the template behind these actions: centralized institutions (according to protesters, the banks are connected to political power brokers) seize people's assets, then prevent their victims from causing trouble by restricting their movements.\n\n\nBoth steps could be accomplished more efficiently using a CBDC: you can go protest in Zhengzhou, no problem, as long as you don't need to pay for transportation or fuel or food.\n\n\nFortunately, even as new technologies are enabling sinister authoritarianism, they are providing a means of escape. A parallel financial system built on cryptocurrency protocols has begun to take shape. This system has defied censorship or control by even the most determined and powerful global actors, and it's only becoming stronger and more resilient. (Its relationship to surveillance is complex, simplifying it at times, frustrating at others, but it effectively thwarts attempts at censorship.)\n\n\nProponents of the emerging crypto financial system often stress the minimization of trust: you don't control your crypto assets when a custodian has promised to hold them for you, or the courts have vowed to protect them, or the architects of the system have assured you its source code is safe and benign. You control your crypto assets when, and only when, you're the only one in control of the cryptographic keys, and the software encoding the system is open for you and all the world to scrutinize, tinker with and attack.\n\n\nThis is all perfectly true. And it goes some way towards accomplishing a laudable goal: obviating the whole discussion of 'rights,' at least as far as money is concerned. Bankers, payment processors, politicians and bureaucrats will respect the sanctity of your rights, right up until the moment they don't. Ethereum, bitcoin and their ilk are machines. You can see the code they run on, and those are the rules. They are indifferent to moral panics, social engineering, dot plots and managerial maneuvering.\n\n\nThis description does not, of course, apply equally well to all cryptocurrencies, some of which are very much centralized. At the time of writing, though, protocols such as bitcoin and ethereum are credibly decentralized, neutral and censorship-resistant. Nor am I aware of a technology outside of cryptocurrency that accomplishes anything comparable.\n\n\nIf the technology exists to escape the slide into financial tyranny, then why write a polemic about the right to transact? Will invoking a slogan protect our freedoms better than building decentralized, censorship-resistant systems? Wouldn't my time be better spent implementing the latest research into, say, zero-knowledge proofs – or the nearest thing my skill set allows?\n\n\nDon't cypherpunks write code?[11]\n\n\nMy answer is that our technological arsenal is critical, but not enough on its own. We need social consensus on what the technology means and what ends it serves. Do elliptic curves care about our ideologies? Of course not. The shapes rotate on, elegant, indifferent, unstoppable. E pur si muove. But without an ideological, moral, political – in short, a memetic – component, we can't make the case for adopting these technologies at scale. We can't develop arguments to prevent them from being defanged, backdoored, persecuted, or regulated into docility.\n\n\nWe need an intellectual arsenal to fight the already-very-much-underway backlash by that sadly large cohort in every place and time that wants to be coerced.\n\n\nNor can even the most sublimely implemented blockchain hold the violence of the state at bay, at least not directly: they may never be able to block or reverse a single transaction, but they can send men with guns to your house and put you in a cage. They may even take your private keys in the process. A pervasive cultural sense that people have a right to transact helps reduce that risk. A law or constitutional amendment would be even better – while clearly recognizing that all of it would be meaningless absent the power of the protocols themselves.\n\n\nBut in all seriousness, if you're reading this and think your time is better spent building freedom-preserving cryptography – I agree. Put this down and get back to it. Please hurry.\n\n\nOnly a handful of people are likely to be raising that objection, though, and in any case, they're already sold on the arguments I care about. We share a fundamental commitment to the freedom to transact, they're just purists. (Or as they might put it, I'm a tourist.)\n\n\nOther, much larger groups of people will have different and more fundamental hesitations about the wisdom or usefulness of this 'right to transact.' In the rest of this essay, I'll attempt to address those as best I can. For now, here's the short version.\n\n\nFirst: the freedom to transact we enjoyed until very recently was a good thing. It deserves to be regarded as a fundamental right, on par with the freedom of speech. Doing so involves significant risks and tradeoffs, but the downsides are much exaggerated. Due process has downsides. Protections against unreasonable search and seizure have downsides. We accept them for good reason, and those who would erode these rights are usually concerned not so much with safety, fairness, justice and the rest, as they are with imposing control over a cowed populace. This is the case with the right to transact.\n\n\nSecond: this right, so long enjoyed in practice without being discussed, because it seemed natural and was hardly ever threatened, is now rapidly disappearing. This is a harmful process that should be stopped and reversed as quickly and thoroughly as possible. Or if not, if abolishing the freedom to transact is somehow a good thing, the people who think so need to make their case. Taking away a freedom that has so thoroughly pervaded our lives should involve the democratic process. It shouldn't occur in silence as the result of a thousand small decisions by private firms and bureaucrats. Pass a law. (Or better yet, come and take it.)\n\n\nThird: we currently possess technologies that, properly deployed, maintained and adopted, will substantially restore and protect the right to transact. We should reject attempts, however well-intentioned, to muddy the waters about what cryptocurrency represents at this moment in history. Its drawbacks and growing pains, while real, are more than acceptable in the face of the alternative, which is to embrace our slide into perfect surveillance and financial unfreedom. There is no third option that pleases crypto's critics while preserving even a modicum of the freedom previous generations enjoyed.\n\n\nStarting with number one then:\n________________\nThe freedom to transact is a good thing\n\n\nFor if Power without laws, can make laws and change the Fundamentall laws of the Kingdome, I know not what subject in England can be secure of his life, or of any thing which he doth call his own.\n\n\nCharles I\n\n\n\n\nTrying to justify a basic moral truth in abstract terms is usually a bad idea. If personal experience, knowledge of history and a general moral framework can't convince you one way or the other on questions like the freedom of worship or the right to due process, a soup of latinate nouns isn't likely to do the trick.\n\n\nAppeals to empathy may have a better chance of success, but empathy won't spontaneously arise in someone who's lacked it so far. And those who enjoy the good graces of the powers that be – through whatever combination of luck, enthusiasm, docility and compromise – often struggle to imagine themselves at the wrong end of arbitrary power.\n\n\nIt's tempting, and perhaps wise, to simply reject the whole exercise. If people truly have a right to transact, say so and leave it at that. Agents and fans of state and corporate power will deny any such right exists, however sublime the arguments in its favor. And people who value individual liberty are likely to agree with the basic position, even if the arguments are nonsense.\nThe authors of the Declaration of Independence didn't tie themselves in philosophical knots over the rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. They called the whole package 'self-evident' – along with human equality, for good measure – and they moved on.\n\n\nSadly, I doubt I can get away with the kind of terse moral clarity the American founders used. The fact is that not everyone holds this truth – that all people should be free to transact – to be self-evident. Most people, through no fault of their own, don't know what it would even refer to. What do you mean, who's stopping you?\n\n\nAs I've argued, the issue hasn't been salient until now, given the capabilities at would-be oppressors' disposal. Cash, the quintessential means of free transaction, remains a fact of daily life. We don't learn in school about some bygone decade's fight to transact freely, because the clash is only beginning – assuming we put up any fight to speak of. The battle lines are mostly alien to the public forum, combining with more familiar fronts in the culture war to form an uncompelling scalene triangle. Accepting or hastening the end of the freedom to transact is, for the moment, the bipartisan default.[12]\n\n\nIt's also worth noting that the Declaration of Independence didn't instantly end the struggle for basic liberties through the power of stirring language alone. Seven more years of war were necessary to decide this 'self-evident' question.\nThe right to transact as prerequisite\nFor the most straightforward and perhaps the most convincing argument I've heard regarding the right to transact, I'm indebted to 6529. I prefer to phrase it in my own words, so please don't attribute any shortcomings in my formulation to him (?), but he deserves the credit for showing me how simple the question really is: once we're denied the right to transact, we're denied every other right by extension.[13]\n\n\nThe ability to buy and sell things is a prerequisite to rights we already regard as inalienable. Take the right to life: it becomes all but impossible to live when you can't buy food, pay for shelter, or sell goods and labor to obtain money in the first place.\n\n\nA person who isn't allowed to buy or rent a car, or pay for a bus or train ticket, can hardly be said to enjoy liberty. Someone barred from basic participation in the economy can't pursue happiness.\n\n\nRemove the right to transact, and you've in practice trampled on any other civil, human and constitutional right we might care to mention.\n\n\nTo be completely clear, I'm not describing a situation of poverty, though that would likely be the ultimate result of the situation I am describing: one in which a person has money, or easily could, but they've been cut off from the system that makes it usable. Their deposits are frozen; their means of sending a payment is disabled; their means of receiving a payment is disabled.\n\n\nI have in mind a situation in which money cannot meaningfully be owned except by its state or private-sector administrators, who grant access to it contingent on whatever criteria they choose.\n\n\nBut what would such a world – such a money – look like? That's hard to say definitively, since it's never existed.\nA thought experiment\nIt isn't difficult to imagine, though. Here's a situation that, given the trajectory of technological and political developments, an ordinary person could plausibly experience before the decade is out: without having been charged with any crime, much less convicted of one, she wakes up to find that her digital wallet no longer works.\n\n\nLet's call her Alice.\n\n\nAlice walks into a cafe in the morning, orders a coffee, and taps her phone to pay for it. A peevish vibration alerts her that the transaction has failed. The Federal Reserve wallet app (let's say she's American), containing all of her dollar deposits in the form of a central bank digital currency, has rejected the purchase. She doesn't carry physical cash, because the government no longer issues it or recognizes it as legal tender.\n\n\nShe tries again, and the phone buzzes again. An error message on her screen informs her, unhelpfully, that something has gone wrong. She drives to a gas station and the error repeats. She can no longer travel. The grocery store won't take her payment either. A week later, the lights and heat go out. She can't pay her utility bills, or for that matter her rent.\n\n\nIf Alice works outside the home, and she can't get to her workplace reliably or at all, she'll lose her job and income. If she works from home, her ability to do so will depend on her having, at a minimum, basic shelter and utilities, and realistically much more than that: the equipment and services she needs to perform her work, even if that's just a laptop with an internet connection.\n\n\nOf course, the question of having what she needs to work might be irrelevant. Let's assume the account freeze hasn't simply prevented Alice from sending money – it's blocked her from receiving it. Even if she could work, she couldn't be paid.\n\n\nA credit card might help fend off the crisis for a few weeks or months, but if her digital dollar wallet remains locked, those bills will go unpaid, and that means of transacting will disappear as well. Nor does it seem likely that the card company would extend credit to someone whose central bank wallet had been shut off.\n\n\nAlice may have no method of finding out why she can't send or receive money. Huge, unaccountable institutions often decline to explain their motives. But let's say, for the sake of argument, that some explanation is provided.\n\n\nWhat could a satisfactory explanation be? What could justify this treatment?\n\n\nWhat could Alice have done – or failed to do – such that a constitutional democracy, subject to the rule of law, could countenance this response? Perhaps an especially vicious crime would, set in the scales of justice, balance out this fate more or less. But if Alice were a dangerous criminal, a menace to those around her, the solution wouldn't be to leave her out on the street, free to commit further acts of depraved violence. It would be to incarcerate her.\n\n\nSimply removing Alice's ability to obtain the necessities of life doesn't protect her neighbors. If anything it endangers them more: now she's not just a violent criminal, but a violent criminal deprived of all legal means of getting food and shelter. Nor does the punishment serve to reform or rehabilitate her. There are those who see prison as a barbaric institution to be abolished entirely; somehow I doubt they'd see removal from the economy as a viable alternative.\n\n\nIf Alice were a fraudster, a Madoff who'd committed financial crimes, this punishment might have a certain karmic ring to it. But it would be unconstitutional: the Eighth Amendment bars the justice system from imposing ironic sentences like folktale genies.\n\n\nIt's difficult to imagine treating someone this way for any reason, which seems to me a serviceable, if inside-out, definition of a right. We would not, for any reason, forbid someone to espouse a particular faith; in other words, we recognize the freedom of worship. We would not strip someone of the ability to use their nation's currency; in other words, we recognize the freedom to transact.\n\n\nIt goes without saying that the right to transact doesn't make any given good or service automatically legal to buy or sell. Illegal items and activities would remain illegal. You are not, nor should you be, allowed to possess a collection of potent nerve agents. But we might add, without any contradiction, that it would be absurd to revoke your permission to use money, based on the assumption – however well-founded – that you would use it to buy potent nerve agents.\nTerms of service\nSuch an approach would of course be expedient for law enforcement and financial institutions, but their convenience shouldn't define what a liberal society does and doesn't allow. We can't accept preemptive asset freezing any more than we would accept a person having their right to free speech preemptively revoked, based on the idea – again, however well-founded – that their ravings might give rise to something illegal.\n\n\nAnd yet making the lives of cops and compliance officers easy is exactly what lies at the root, not just of Alice's hypothetical hell, but of a growing number of real people's (more on that later).\n\n\nThere are clear precedents for treating people in similar ways. Social media companies routinely remove content and ban users who engage in perfectly legal, but ugly or inconvenient, speech. Unacceptable as the platforms' behavior may be according to any good-faith interpretation of democratic, constitutional principles, such expedients became the norm in less than a decade.[14] It is convenient for powerful people and wholly satisfactory to powerful political coalitions. Unsurprisingly, no one has stopped it.\n\n\nReturning to the question of what Alice might have done to deserve her fate, it's hard to avoid the conclusion that she somehow violated the Fed's terms of service. We posited that she wasn't charged with a crime. If she had been – or rather, if she'd been convicted – she might justly suffer unpleasant consequences, though summary removal from the economy would be a cruel and unusual punishment if there ever was one.\n\n\nThe idea that a court would let a convicted criminal remain physically free, but strip them of the ability legally to obtain basic necessities, is – thankfully – unrealistic. What's depressingly plausible is this scenario: aided by constant surveillance, a bureaucrat 